# Dados geoespaciais recolha e curadoria

[Regresso à primeira aula](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/1.%20Introdu%C3%A7%C3%A3o_primeiro%20mapa.md)

The class we will start collecting our own data from scratch. Where do we find data? How should we organise our data to fit it our spatial questions?

In preparation for the next meeting you need to work through the manual and prepare all the data. The session will go into the issues and challenges you have found. 

[Download the execise data here]()

## Plano de aula

| **Hora**         |   **Tema**   |
|:--------------|:-----------|
| 9.00 - 9.15 | Perguntas |
| 9.15 - 9.45 | [Dados espaciais](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/2.%20Dados_geoespaciais_recolha_e_curadoria.md#21-dados-espaciais)  |
| 9.45 - 10.30 | [Curadoria de dados](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/2.%20Dados_geoespaciais_recolha_e_curadoria.md#22-digitaliza%C3%A7%C3%A3o-de-dados)|
| 10.30 - 10.45 | **Pausa** | 
| 10.45 - 11.30 | [Digitalização de dados](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/2.%20Dados_geoespaciais_recolha_e_curadoria.md#23-tratamento-de-dados) |
| 11.30 - 12.00 | Perguntas |

## 2.1 Dados espaciais
In the last session you were handed some data and asked to create a map. However, in may cases you won't find data being delivered so easily.
Luckily there are some places where we can find geospatial data for Antiquity. The [Mercury project](https://projectmercury.eu/datasets/) is one of these very helpful sites where differet datasets are aggregated.

[Recogito](https://recogito.pelagios.org/)

Now it is great to find usable data. However, we should not lose ourselves in a data collection frenzy. Just like we don't go into the library and randomly start reading books, we need to ask ourselves what data we need for our research questions. Moreover, we might encounter spatial data in a multitude of forms and want to use it for your research questions. Here we are on the intersection of our knowledge as historians, where source critisism is central, and spatial data. As historians we are used to consider our sources for their context and decide what we can use and what to discard. Often we need to do the same with spatial data.


### 2.1.1 Valor separado por vírgula o CSV
A very easy and basic way to collect and organise our spatial data is Excel. Similar to the Attribute Table of our files in QGIS we have, fields (colums) and rows (lines). The benefit of Excel is that we can work with a rather easy programme to start organizing our data and we can convert it to a format that can be read by QGIS: the CSV. 

The CSV, in portuguese Valor separado por vírgula, is a text file format that saves tabular data. The delimiter of te data is the comma, hence the name. It is good practice to avoid comma's in your attributes, to avoid problems when converting to CSV. All mark-up you use in Excel will be lost when saving it as a CSV. So the fancy coloring and filtering is lost in the CSV. 

However, let us start with taking a look at the Excel sheet that was the basis for our earlier Places 

Take a look at the excel sheet _**Places_Visigothic_Councils_list**_ in the data package for this class. Here we have all people mentioned from the Third Council of Toletum (589) up to the Sixteenth (693). For good practice the first field 'Código' contains an ID number for each entry. The choice to make this numerical in ascending order per council is very helpful. It is followed by 'Concílio' and 'Ano', both indicating the council by number and year. Then we have the 'Cargo (latím)' or position of the person followed by the place as 'Sede' and 'Sede (latím)'.

In our life we will find many of these lists in publications. They are spatial as they contain places. However, often people don't see the need, or don't know how to convert this into a map. Therefore, they opt for a list without the needed spatial data (the Y and X colums, where we need to put the coordinates). How do we find the coordinates of 
People data vs places data

Finding coordinates of places 

## 2.2 Digitalização de dados
Data delivered in different formats

Georeferencing images
<br>Image Sabine

Openmap service
<br> adding a open layer for reference

Drawing from raster
<br> digitizing from image (cities and boundaries Sabine)

## 2.3 Curadoria de dados

Data cleaning, ordering
Drop site for non geospatial data

Certainties


[Passar para a aula seguinte](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/3.%20An%C3%A1lises_de_datos_relacional_e_quantitativa.md)
