# Análises de datos relacional e quantitativa

## Plano de aula

| **Hora**         |   **Tema**   |
|:--------------|:-----------|
| 9.00 - 9.15 | Perguntas |
| 9.15 - 9.45 | [Estudos de casos](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/3.%20An%C3%A1lises_de_datos_relacional_e_quantitativa.md#31-estudos-de-casos)  |
| 9.45 - 10.30 | [Dados quantitativos](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/3.%20An%C3%A1lises_de_datos_relacional_e_quantitativa.md#32-dados-quantitativos)|
| 10.30 - 10.45 | **Pausa** | 
| 10.45 - 11.30 | [Análises espaciais](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/3.%20An%C3%A1lises_de_datos_relacional_e_quantitativa.md#33-an%C3%A1lises-espaciais) |
| 11.30 - 12.00 | [Fim](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/M%C3%A9todos_espaciais_para_os_visigodos/3.%20An%C3%A1lises_de_datos_relacional_e_quantitativa.md#34-outras-qgis-possibilidades) |

## 3.1 Curadoria de dados
In our data package we find the _**Places_Visigothic_Councils_list**_. Here we have all people mentioned from the Third Council of Toletum (589) up to the Sixteenth (693). For good practice the first field 'Código' contains an ID number for each entry. The choice to make this numerical in ascending order per council is very helpful if we want to reorder the table. It is followed by 'Concílio' and 'Ano', both indicating the council by number and year. Then we have the 'Cargo (latím)' or position of the person followed by the place as 'Sede' and 'Sede (latím)'.

In our life we will find many of these lists in publications. They are spatial as they contain places. However, often people don't see the need, or don't know how, to convert this into a map. Knowing how to search for their coordinates we can rather easily convert them into working CSV files. However, data is seldomly easy and forward. You might notice some colored cells. These are problematic cells where we find conflicting data. For instance, the first red cell is ID 14, where the Sede is called Granada. The reason to label might not be clear at first sight. Granada is the site of the Roman city of Iliberris. However, when we look at other attestations of Iliberris we find that it is linked to Elvira. We as researchers have to find out why this descrepancy is in our list and how to solve this.




Returning to the excel sheet _**Places_Visigothic_Councils_curated**_ with which we started earlier. While working with the places data

Compare the two excel sheets we have in the data package.




Data cleaning, ordering
Drop site for non geospatial data

Certainties

Estudos de casos

### 3.1.1 Emerita na época visigoda

Digitizing the map of Emerita in the 6th century

## 3.2 Dados quantitativos

## 3.3 Análises espaciais
Locating epigraphy 

Analysing epigraphic concentrations


## 3.4 Outras QGIS possibilidades
See modules in [QGIS for Classical Studies](https://github.com/Toletum-Network/QGIS_Classical_Studies/blob/master/README.md#qgis-online-course-for-classical-studies)
